Well, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Hello. Yeah, excited to be here, Michael.
I've been listening to Talk Python for, I can't even remember how long,
but I'm pretty sure it was before I had a first Python job.
So, yeah, a long, long time.
That's amazing. Well, now you're helping create it. It's amazing.
Yeah, exactly. No, yeah. Super excited to be on ChatKolo.
Yeah, we're going to talk about Kolo, your Visual Studio Code,
Django, I don't even know what to call it.
It's pretty advanced, pretty in-depth extension
seems to be not quite enough.
So what any project, people are going to really dig that,
people who Django, and we'll see what the future plans are.
If we could talk you into other ones.
But for now, Django plus VS Code is going to be super interesting.
Before we get to that, of course, you must know the drill.
Tell us a bit about yourself.
Yeah, for sure.
So my name is Will.
I've been using Django since, well, I guess I've been using Python since about 2013, I
want to say.
So a little over 10 years.
And yeah, just kind of like fell in love with it.
Wanted to make websites, started using Django.
And yeah, I guess never really looked back.
That was in school back then, but kind of always had a love for like tinkering and building
side projects.
I actually studied I did a management degree in university um but I really loved hanging out with
all the computer science kids all the computer science students and I think a part of me really
wanted to impress them so I was always building side projects and one of them was actually um
a uh a slack app called simple poll and yeah we were trying to like you know organize something
in slack and really felt like the need for polls so built this little side project just like
during university and then it became really really popular and uh a few years later it became my
full-time job so for the past awesome yeah four years i've been running simple polls of slack
out building out the team up to like seven eight of us um and uh yeah i had a great time doing that
in the middle um actually worked at GitHub for two years uh working on ruby and rails and that
was super fun, like a great company, great people, huge code base, learned a lot, learned a lot there.
That was really fun. But yeah, I left after about two years to work full time on SimplePulse.
So SimplePulse had been running as a side project kind of in the background. And actually, it's
interesting, like, I think kind of the order of events thinking back, Microsoft was acquired GitHub
while I was there. And then suddenly all of my colleagues started talking about buying boats
and leaving the company. And I thought, hmm, I don't quite have boat money, but how can I,
what's an ace I might have up my sleeve? And it was SimplePol, which had got like tons of users,
but I never monetized it. So I set out to monetize it. And then a year later,
it was actually bringing in more revenue than my salary at GitHub.
So I decided to quit.
So that's kind of the SimplePol backstory.
So SimplePol is a Django app, reasonably sized now,
a bunch of people working on it.
And then, yeah, at some point in the journey of building SimplePol,
I kind of started playing around with Colo.
So Colo also kind of, just like SimplePol, started as a side project,
but now not to make polls in Slack,
but instead to improve my own developer experience
building SimplePol.
So kind of built it as my own tool
for making Django, yeah,
working with Django more fun,
give me more insight,
give me access to some of the data
that I felt was so close,
but that I had to just like manually get in there
and print out.
So the reasons Colo started out
as supporting just Django and VS Code
is because that's what I was using
and it was an internal side project.
And now actually handed over SimplePole to a new CEO.
I'm no longer involved day to day, and I'm working full time on Colo.
Man, congratulations on multiple levels.
That's awesome.
Thank you.
Yeah.
I want to talk to you a bit about SimplePole for just a minute.
But before then, you pointed out, look, I made this side project.
And how many hours are you spending on it?
A week, maybe?
Oh, it was interesting.
So honestly, like, so this was like right at the beginning,
like when it was first started.
Yeah, it's a good question.
I always joke that the best thing about my management degree
was that I had a lot of free time to, like, do build side projects.
Honestly, I think it could have been, like, 20, 30, 40 hours a week.
Yeah.
That was, yeah.
It could have, I think, yeah, it definitely varied week to week.
And then later on?
And then, yeah.
And then while I was working, when I had a full-time job as a software engineer, yeah, that was a lot tougher.
It was like nights and weekends.
Rarely had energy during the week to work on it.
And then, honestly, like since it was a real project with real users, I ended up spending a lot of the weekend doing like support.
Like support stuff.
Yeah, absolutely.
Support.
Yeah.
And then you charge and then now you have finance stuff and like legal stuff to do.
So that wasn't super fun.
It really slows down the features and the creation of stuff, doesn't it?
I would say I probably spent fully 50% of my full-time job doing email support, that kind of stuff.
You know, just like there's tons of people taking courses and listening to podcasts.
And they'll have questions and thoughts.
And it's awesome, but it also is really tricky.
So the reason I ask is I always find it fascinating.
You'll see like news articles.
I don't know.
They're always click-baity or whatever.
This person makes three times their job working 10 hours a week on this other thing.
You make three times what you make for your job.
What are you doing at your job?
You know what I mean?
Right?
And just the ability to say you can make that step where you go from kind of tired at night's extra time and squeezing on the weekends to full-time, full-energy.
If it's already doing well on a very thin life support,
then give it full time and energy.
It's just, of course it's going to be better, right?
It's so interesting.
I actually have a lot of thoughts about this.
Maybe I should write something about this at some point.
But yeah, I actually think running a bootstrap side project kind of business
as you have a job can be really good
because it really forces you to prioritize and build the most important things.
Yeah.
It's kind of like having kids.
Oh, nice.
Yeah, I need to try that someday.
Oh, you'll be real tired.
I tell you, you'll love to prioritize your time.
That's awesome.
No, yeah, I think it really forced you to prioritize.
So I actually sometimes recommend when folks ask me like for advice, like, should I quit
my job to go all in or not?
I actually sometimes think there's a lot of nice stability and that comes from having
a job.
Plus, it's actually really nice to have coworkers.
It's nice to have structure.
Like you actually need to take all of that, well, work in a way on yourself.
Like it's, you know, if you have to make your own structure, like if you're building your own thing and that can actually be a bit tricky.
Like I really struggled with that at the beginning.
So I think there's something to be said for, yeah, for working on, yeah, for spending like limited time on something basically and prioritizing just the most important angle.
And I don't necessarily disagree with that.
It's interesting.
Yeah. And then also, I think, so for me, it was interesting, like, in terms of like, how much like, you know, life support energy you put in versus like, full time energy, I was growing decently, like while I was still at GitHub. And I thought, okay, I'm gonna go in on this full time. And if I go from like, 10 hours a week, or less to like 40 hours a week, that would probably 4x the growth rate as well.
that's how it works right and like totally didn't like it totally didn't work in fact like i think
the um the month after i left i had like my first down month where like the revenue decreased and i
was like wait a minute what's going on here how that doesn't make any sense that's not fair so i
think that also points that like there yeah you can definitely spend more hours on something and
it can be like the wrong things or yeah not doubling down on something that's really working
so but overall obviously you yeah at some point like just being able to like test out more ideas
is like really valuable and for that like yeah i mean if if if you only have time to do support
on your on your project that's really working well and your full-time job is the rest of the
the how you spend your week then yeah feels like you should give yourself some time to build
features and maybe quit the job yeah well it's also a an interesting point about the
the structure because not everyone is gonna get up at eight o'clock sit at their desk and
and they're gonna like you know i kind of can just do whatever and it's you know it's uh it's
its own discipline its own learned skill 100 yeah yep i remember like one of the first um weeks
after i was full-time on simple poll i woke up in the morning and said well the money's coming in
i don't need to work i don't have a boss and i just sat in bed and watched youtube videos all day
And then I just felt miserable at the end of the day.
I was like, this is supposed to feel great.
Why all this freedom I've wanted and dreamt about for so long?
Why does it not feel great?
Yeah, also feels like risk and different kinds of responsibility.
So SimplePol, the reason I said it'd be worth talking about a little bit is Slack's a popular platform.
And this is based on Django, right?
Yeah, so SimplePol is a full-on Django app.
yeah um and it's it's funny sometimes people joke that i don't know um if you've gone through the
official django tutorial but in there you actually make a polls app in the browser
sometimes people joke wait did you just turn this into like a slack app and then you productize
the getting started tutorial yeah exactly um but yeah like it turned out that like um polls and
then yeah getting you know your your team more connected and slack and more engaged are like
really care about so um yeah it it it came to the slack simple pole joined the slack platform like at
the perfect time and uh has just been growing super well since then tell people a little bit
about what it takes technically to make a slack slack app i mean yeah slack is not built in python
as far as i know and it's it's probably javascript and electron mostly the people interact with right
So what is the deal here?
Yeah, it's actually super interesting.
So the way you build like a Slack app,
it's actually all backend based.
So when a user interacts in Slack,
Slack sends your app, your backend,
like a JSON payload saying like,
this user clicked this button.
And then you can just send a JSON payload back saying,
all right, now show this message.
Now show this modal.
And they have their own JSON based block kit framework
where you can render different types of content.
So you don't actually have to think about JavaScript or React or any of their stack at all.
It's basically all sending JSON payloads around and calling various parts of the Slack API.
So you can build a Slack app in your favorite language, any kind of exotic language if you wanted to.
But yeah, I love Python, so I decided to build it in Python and Django.
So yeah, actually building Slack apps is a really pleasant experience.
Interesting.
What's the deployment back in story look like?
Is it a pass sort of thing?
Serverless?
Yeah, so at the time it was Heroku.
Simple was running on Heroku.
And then I think a few years ago we migrated it to AWS.
So now it's running on AWS and ECS.
Nice.
Okay.
Yeah.
So Docker for the win.
Right on.
Yeah.
How does it work in Talk Python?
I'm curious.
what's where are you deployed it's it's all digital ocean and then i have one big like eight
eight cpu server running i think 16 different django apps not jaco sorry apps no sorry docker
apps that are all all doing like you know some of them share a database that's in docker and some of
of them do sort of have their own self-contained pair of like web app and database and so on.
But it's all Docker on one big server, which is fairly new for me.
And it's glorious.
That's awesome.
Yeah.
All right.
So again, congrats on this.
Very, very neat.
Let's talk Colo.
Let's do it.
I first came across this, I've come across it independently twice.
Once, when the Django chat guys recommended that I talk to you because they're like,
Will's doing cool stuff.
You should definitely talk to him.
This Django thing for VS Code is super cool.
But also, I can't remember, there's somebody on your team whose social media profile I came
across and I saw this and I'm like, oh, this is pretty neat. I think we even covered it on the
Python Bytes podcast. Oh, no way. Let's see. Yeah, sure. In January we did. So yeah. So that's
that we talked about a little bit, but this just looks like such a neat thing. And it's,
I encourage people to, who may be interested in this, to visit colo.app because it's a super visual
sort of experience of understanding your code, right?
Would you agree?
Yeah, I mean, 100%.
Yeah, it's a funny thought.
I hadn't really thought yet that, yeah,
a podcast is going to be a hard way to describe
the visual beauty and magic that Kolo can bring to your code.
But yeah, 100%.
Yeah, so Kolo very much started as the idea of,
hey, I should be able to see how my code actually flows.
I think like all of us, as we build software,
as we write our Python code,
we have this kind of like mental model
of how all the different functions like fit together,
how like a bit of data ends up from like the beginning,
like to the end,
like it passes through maybe a bunch of functions,
it passes through a bunch of like classes,
a bunch of loops,
all the state gets like modified.
And we have this kind of like mental picture
of all of that in our head.
And the kind of very beginning of Kolo
So the question I asked myself was like, is there a way we can just like visualize that?
Is there a way we can just actually print that out onto a screen?
So if you go to koila.app, it kind of looks like this funny sun chart with like lots of like a kind of a sunny tree chart with lots of nodes going from the center and like going off into the distance.
which I think is like, yeah, similar to like what folks kind of might already have in their head about like how the code flows.
Maybe another way to describe it is imagine like you enable a debugger at the beginning of every function and at the end of every function in your code.
And you print out like what was the function name?
What were the input arguments?
What was the return value?
And then you arrange all of that in a graph
that then shows which function called which other function.
It almost looks like what you get out of profilers.
Right.
When you say like, okay, this function took 20%,
but if you expand it out, I'll say,
well, it really spent 5% there, 10% there,
and then a bunch of it.
And you can kind of traverse that.
100%, yeah.
But I'm guessing you're not really interested
in how long it took,
although maybe you can probably get that out of it.
The important is more,
what is the dependency?
What are the variables being passed?
And understanding individual behavior, right?
Right, exactly.
What do you think?
Yeah, 100%.
I think it's interesting because Colo actually uses
under the hood a bunch of the Python profiling APIs.
And I think people often think of Colo as a profiler.
We do actually have a traditional profiling-based chart,
which puts the timing at the center.
But you're absolutely right that the focus of our main chart,
the one that we're both looking at,
that has this idea of the function overview
and which function calls which.
The idea there is absolutely the hierarchy.
And giving yourself that same mental model
that someone who's worked on a code base for three months
has in their head immediately yourself by just looking at it.
So you can kind of usually in the way these charts turn out,
you can notice that there's like points of interest.
Like there's one function that has a lot of children.
So that clearly is coordinating like a bunch of the work
where you can see kind of similarities
in the structure of some of the subtrees.
So you know, oh, okay, maybe that's like a loop
and it's the same thing happening a couple of times.
So you can essentially, I get this overview
and then it's fully interactive
and you can dive in to like what exactly is happening.
Yeah.
Is it interactive?
So I can like click on these pieces
and it'll pull them out.
Yeah, so we actually,
and this is what's,
it'll be live by the time this podcast goes live.
We actually have a playground in the browser.
This is also super fun.
We can talk about this.
Well, let me drop you a link real quick.
This will be at play.colo.app.
So with this,
Yeah, this is super fun because this is fully Python just running in the browser using Pyodide and WebAssembly.
Oh, nice. Okay.
But yeah, so this is the fully visual version where you can...
Yeah, it defaults to loading a simple Fibonacci algorithm.
Yeah.
And you can see what the cola visualization of Fibonacci looks like.
And you can actually edit the code and see how it changes with your edits and all of that.
We have a couple other examples.
Wow.
the pandas one and the whack-a-mole one are pretty intense they're pretty wild pictures they look like
sort of japanese fans or whatever yeah exactly we actually we once had a competition at a
conference to see who could make like the most fun looking algorithm uh and then and visualize
with colo but yeah like the um yeah it it's fun like visualizing code is really great
Yeah, that's awesome.
So this is super cool.
It's just all from scratch.
It's besides Pyodide here, not like VS Code in the browser.
I think it's using Monaco in this case or CodeMirror.
But otherwise, this is Pyodide and a little bit of React to pull the data together.
But yeah, we're really...
Yeah.
it's it's uh otherwise home home homemade and yeah this is kind of like the kind of what colo
has been for like um like the past like two years or so has been this kind of side project for
uh for simple poll to help like just visualize and understand code better the code the simple
code base to be honest has grown so large that like there's parts of it that i wrote like five
years ago that i don't understand anymore and it's like annoying to get back to that and having
spend like a day to re-familiarize myself with everything it's a lot nicer to just like
to actually kind of explain like end-to-end how it works um you install like in a django project
you install colo as a as a middleware and then uh as you just browse and use your django app and
make requests uh traces get saved so colo records these traces they can actually get saved in a
local SQLite database.
And then you can view the traces, which includes the visualization, but also like lots of other
data.
Like you can actually see in the version you have there, like we show every single function
call, like the inputs and outputs for each function call.
So that main idea of code is to like really show you everything that happened in your code.
So in a Django app, that would be like the request, the response, like all the headers,
every single function call, input and output,
outbound requests, SQL queries as well.
So really the goal is to show you everything.
And then you can view these stored traces
either through VS Code or,
and this is also will be live by the time
this episode goes live through like a web middleware version,
which is a bit similar to Django Debug Toolbar.
Not sure if you've played around much with Django Debug Toolbar.
Yeah, a little bit, yeah.
Those things were actually pretty impressive, right?
I played out with that one and the Pyramid one.
And you can see more than I think you would reasonably expect
from just a little thing on the side of your web app.
Yeah, yeah, exactly.
It's like really, and that's very much our goal too,
like very kind of deep, deep insight.
But in our minds, this is almost like a bit like old news.
Like we've been using this for like a few years basically.
And then at some point, like last year, we started playing around with this idea of like, okay, so we have this trace that has information about like pretty much everything that happened in like a request.
Can we, is there any way we could use that to solve this like reasonably large pain point for us, which is like writing tests?
I'm actually curious.
Do you enjoy writing tests?
No.
Actually, I'll tell you what.
I used to actually.
I used to really enjoy writing tests.
I used to enjoy thinking a lot about it.
And then as the projects would get bigger, I'm like, you know, this is, these tests don't really cover what I need them to cover anymore.
And they're kind of dragging it down.
And then, you know, the thing that really kind of knocked it out for me is I'd have like teammates and they wouldn't care about the tests at all.
So they would break the tests or just write a bunch of code without tests.
And I felt kind of like a parent cleaning up after kids.
Like, why is it so – can we just pick up, like, why are there dishes here?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
You know, just going around and like, this is not what I want to do.
Like, I want to just write software.
And I understand the value test, of course.
A hundred percent, yeah.
At the same time, I feel like maybe higher order integration tests often, for me at least, serve more value.
because it's like I could write 20 little unit tests
or I could write two integration tests.
I'm actually completely with you on that.
Okay.
I think the bang for the buck of integration tests
are like great, like really, really useful.
Like, yeah, I think you can almost think of tests
as having like two purposes.
One being like, well, actually,
I think this would be too simple in explanation.
Let me not make grand claims about all the uses of tests.
I think the use of it that most people are after is this idea of like, what I've built isn't going to break by accident.
Yeah.
Like, you want confidence that any future change you make doesn't impact a bunch of unrelated stuff that it's not supposed to impact.
I think that's what most people are after with tests.
And I think for that specific desired result, like integration tests are the way to go.
And there's some cool writing about this from, there's a, yeah, I wrote a little blog post about Kolo's test generation abilities.
And in there, I linked to a post from Kent C. Dodds from the JavaScript community who has a great post about, I think it's called, write tests, not too many, mostly integration.
kind of after this idea of like eat not too much mostly vegetables i think that's the yeah exactly
exactly yeah i'm a big fan of that and actually it's interesting i'm speaking to a bunch of folks
over the past like year about tests um i think a lot of people a lot of engineers think about
writing tests as vegetables and obviously some people love vegetables and some of us love writing
tests. But it seems like for a lot of folks, it's kind of like a
obviously necessary part of creating great software, but it's maybe
not like the most fun part of our job.
Right. Or you pick up
some project, you're a consultant
or you're taking over some open source project and you're like, this has no tests.
Right. Yeah. It's kind of like running a linter
and it says there's a thousand errors.
You're like, well, we're not going to do that.
We're just not going to run the linter against it
because it's just too messed up at this point, right?
It's interesting you mentioned the picking up
like a project with no tests
because I think within the next three months,
we're not quite there yet,
but I think in the next three months
with Codos test generation abilities,
we'll have a thing where, yeah,
all we need is a Python code base to get started.
And then we can bring that
to like a really respectable level of code coverage
just by using colo um okay how cool let's talk about the how um so yeah i was kind of talking
about this uh a second ago i'm sorry it's just a helicopter flying by i don't hear it it's fine
you're good you got a good mic nice um yeah so i was kind of describing a second ago how like
we kind of you know simple poll has tons of integration tests simple poll actually is about
80,000 lines of application code, not including migrations and config files. And then it's about
100,000 lines of tests. And most of that is integration tests. So simple, very well tested,
lots of, yeah, really mostly integration tests. But it is always a bit of a chore to write them.
So we started thinking about, hmm, this colo tracing we're doing, can that help us with making
tests somehow. And then we started experimenting with it. And like to our surprise, it's actually,
yeah, I'm still sometimes surprised that it actually works. But basically, the idea is that
if you have a trace that captures everything in the request, you can kind of invert it to
build a integration test. So let me give an example of what that means.
So the biggest challenge we found with creating integration tests is actually the test data setup.
So getting your application into the right shape before you can send a request to it or before you can call a certain function.
That's like kind of the hardest part.
Writing the asserts is almost like easy or even like fun.
Right.
There's the three A's of unit testing.
Arrange, assert, and act.
Wait, arrange, act, and assert.
Exactly.
The first and the third one
that you kind of have data on, right?
Exactly, yeah.
So we're like, wait a second.
We actually can kind of extract this,
like the act, so like the setting,
sorry, the arrange, setting up the data,
the act, like actually making the HTTP request,
and then the assert, like to ensure the status change
or that the request go to 200 or something.
We actually have the data for this.
And it's reasonably straightforward.
Like if you capture in, you know, just your like normal,
like imagine you have a local to-do app
and you browse like a to-do kind of demo,
simple to-do app, and you browse to the homepage
and the homepage maybe lists the to-dos.
And if you've got Colo enabled,
then Colo will have captured the request, right?
So like the request went to the homepage
and it returned a 200.
So that's already like two things we can now turn into code
in our integration test.
So first step being, well, I guess this is the act and the assert in the sense that the assert is the 200.
And then the act is firing off a request to the homepage.
Now, the tricky bit, and this is where it gets the most fun, is the arrange.
So if we just put those two things into our test, to imaginary test, there wouldn't have been any to-dos there, right?
So it's actually not an interesting test yet.
But in your local version where the trace was recorded, you actually had maybe like three to-dos already in your database.
Does that make sense so far?
Yeah, yeah, absolutely.
So on the homepage, like your to-do app might make a SQL query to like select all the to-dos or all the to-dos for the currently logged in user.
And then Kolo would store that SQL query, would store that select, and would also store actually what data the database returned.
This is actually something where, yeah, Kolo goes beyond a lot of the existing kind of like debugging tooling that might exist.
Like actually showing exactly what data the database returned in a given SQL query.
But imagine we get like a single to-do return, right?
We now know that to replicate this like trace in our test,
we need to start by seeding that to do into the database.
So that's where like the trace inversion comes in.
If like a request starts with a select of like the to do table,
then the first thing that needs to happen in the integration test
is actually a like creating like an insert into the database for that to do.
And now when you fire off the request to the homepage,
it actually goes through your real code path
where like an actual to-do gets loaded
and gets printed out onto the page.
So that's like the most basic kind of example
of like how can you turn
like a locally captured trace of a request
that like made a SQL query
and returned 200 into like an integration test.
Yeah, that's awesome.
You know, one of the big,
one of the things that makes me
want to write fewer unit tests
or not write a unit test in a certain case
is I can test using mocking.
Given my, let's say, SQLAlchemy or Beanie or whatever,
Django ORM model, it theoretically matches the database.
I can do some stuff, set some values and check
and that's all good.
But in practice, if the schema in the database
doesn't match the shape of my object,
the system freaks out and crashes and says,
well, that's not going to work, right?
There's no way.
And so it doesn't matter how good I mock it out.
It has to go end to end before I feel very good about it.
Oh, yeah, okay, it's going to really, really work, right?
Yeah, exactly.
I feel like it's an interesting story, like you're saying,
like let's actually see if we can just create the data,
but let it run all the way through, right?
And no, I'm totally with you.
And I think, yeah, I've often seen like unit tests pass
and say, I mean, there's like lots of memes about this, right?
How like unit tests say everything is good,
but the server is down.
Like, how is that possible?
I think in Django world,
it's reasonably common to write integration tests like this,
as in like the actual database gets hit.
You have this idea of like the Django test client,
which sends like a, you know, real in air quotes,
HTTP request through the entire Django stack,
as opposed to doing the more unit test approach.
So it hits the routes.
It hits like all the, that sort of stuff all the way.
And the template.
Yep.
And then at the end, you can assert based on like the content of the response,
or you can check, like, imagine if we go back to the to-do example,
if we're testing like the add to-do endpoint or form submission,
then you could make a, like a database query at the end.
And Colo actually does this as well,
because like, again, we know like that you inserted a to do
in your request, so we can actually make an assert.
This is a different example of the trace inversion.
If there's an insert in your request that you captured,
then we know at the end of the integration test,
we want to assert that this row now exists in the database.
So yeah, you can assert at the very end to say,
does this row actually exist in the database now?
So it's a very nice kind of reasonably end-to-end,
but still integration test.
It's not like a brittle click around in the browser
and kind of hope for the best kind of thing.
It's like, yeah.
Yeah, as we said at the beginning,
I think like integration tests
just get you great bank for your buck.
They really do.
It's like the 80-20 rule of unit testing for sure.
Yeah, yeah.
And yeah.
So is this all algorithmic or?
Yep, great question.
Is it?
Yeah. Is it LLMs? Like how much VC funding are you looking for? Like, you know, like we got LLMs in there, like they're coming out of the woodwork. I'm just kidding. No, how do you, how does this happen?
Yeah, so it's actually all algorithmic and rule-based at the moment. So this idea of a select becomes like an insert and an insert becomes like a select assert. We were surprised how far we could get with just rules.
And the benefit we have is that we kind of have this like full-sized SimplePol Django code base to play around with.
And yeah, like generating integration tests in SimplePol just like fully works.
There's a bunch of tweaks we like had to make to, yeah, as soon as I guess you work in kind of like outside of a demo example,
you want like time mocking and HTTP mocking and you want to use your like factory boy factories.
And like, maybe you have a custom unit test, like base class and all of all of this.
But yeah, it like actually, it actually works now.
I gave a talk at DjangoCon Europe last year.
And there was kind of like, it's kind of like a bit of a wow moment in the audience where,
yeah, you just click generate test, and it generates you like 100 line integration test
and the test actually passes.
So that was like, yeah, people just started clapping, which was a great feeling.
I'm still a bit surprised that it works on it.
But yeah, no LLM at all.
I do think like LLMs could probably make these tests like even better.
Or you know how I was saying a second ago, like in three months, we could go take a code
base from like zero test coverage to maybe like 60%, 80%.
I imagine if we made use of LLMs, that would help make that happen.
Yeah.
Yeah, you could talk to it about, like, well, these things aren't covered.
Right.
What can we do to cover them?
I don't know if you maybe could do fully, fully automated.
Just push the button and let it generate it.
But, you know, it could also be like a conversational, not a conversational,
sort of a guided, let's get the rest of the test.
and like, okay, we're down to 80, we got 80%,
but there's the last bit are a little tricky.
Like what ones are missing?
All right.
So how do you think we could do this?
Is that valid?
No, no, you need to,
that's not really the kind of data we're going to pass.
You know, I don't know.
It seems something like that, right?
I really liked that.
I'd not thought about like a conversation
as a way to generate tests,
but that makes so much sense.
Right.
And kind of bringing the developer along with them.
Yeah, exactly.
It's gotten too hard or something, you know?
Yeah.
There's something cool about just clicking a button
and see how much code coverage you could get to.
but um yeah chatting to it i think also honestly like um so far like our test generation logic is
a bit of a black box it just kind of like works um until the point where like it doesn't so we're
actually kind of in the in the process of like shining a bit more of a light into like
like essentially the like internal data model that colo keeps track of to know what the database
state should be like in this arrange part of the integration test and yeah we're actually like in
the process of like um yeah talking to a bunch of users who are already using it and also finding
like companies who um want to increase their increase their test coverage or who have problems
with their testing and and want to improve that and kind of working closely with them to make that
happen um yeah and uh yeah that that's kind of a huge focus for us as we figure out like
what how do we want to monetize cola like so far cola has just been kind of supported by simple
paul as a as a side project but we're kind of making it real making it its own business um so
yeah and we think the test generation is going to play a big a big part in that right like that
That could be certainly a premium team feature sort of thing.
Exactly, yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Enterprise.
Enterprise version comes with auto testing.
Yeah, exactly.
Something like that, yeah.
Yeah.
So, yeah, I mean, if there's anyone listening
and they're keen to increase their code coverage,
please email me.
Maybe we can leave my email in the notes
or something like that.
Yeah, yeah, I'll put your contact info
in the show notes for sure.
It's, yeah, it's actually really nice.
It's just w at colo.app.
Oh, very nice.
So yeah, if anyone's listening
and wants to kind of like increase their code coverage
or has a lot of code bases that have zero coverage
that would benefit from getting to like
some level of coverage,
we'd love to help you and talk to you.
Even if the solution doesn't like involve using code,
they're just really, really keen to talk to anyone
about like Python tests and what can be done there.
So yeah, please hit me up.
Awesome.
Yeah, I'll definitely put some details
in the show notes for that.
All right, so I have some questions as well.
Please, yes.
Right here, I'm looking at the webpage, and the angle bracket title is Colo for Django.
But in the playground thing you sent me, it was on plain Python code.
It was on algorithms.
It was on Pandas, which I thought was pretty interesting how much you could see inside Pandas.
Makes me wonder, you know, if you look at the web frameworks, there's two or three more that are pretty popular out there, and they all support middleware.
Yeah, 100%.
colo kind of started as like this like side project for our django app and i think um
that that's why we kind of went there first kind of the audience we know we know best um
as well yeah exactly dog fooded um lily who's who's an engineer on the team is um and who's
been yeah building kind of a lot of uh like yeah a lot of the python side of colo is um like a
core contributor to Django. So Django is like really where we're home. And to be honest, I think when
building a new product, it's kind of nice to keep the audience somewhat small initially, keep like
building for very specific needs as opposed to going like very wide, very early. So that was kind
of very much, very much the intention, but there's no reason why Colo can't support Flask, FastAPI,
the scientific Python stack.
Yeah.
Like as you can see in the playground,
it does totally work on,
on plain,
on plain Python.
It's really just a matter of,
yeah,
like honestly,
like FastAPI support would probably be like a 40 line config file in,
in like our code.
And there's actually,
yeah,
we're thinking of ways to,
we're thinking of ways to just make that actually a bit more plus,
as well. There's only like so many things we can reasonably support well ourselves. But to get like,
even, oh, sorry, go on. I was going to say, if somebody else out there has an open source project,
they want it to have good support for this, right? Like, hey, I run HTTPX, or I run Litestar,
or whatever. And I want mine to look good here too, right? Yeah, no, no, totally. So the thing
you can do already today is there's a little bit of config you can pass in. And actually,
if you look back on the pandas example, you'll see this. By default, Colo actually doesn't show you
library code if you use it in your own code base. But you can tell it, show me everything that
happened, like literally everything. And then it will do that for you. So in this example you're
looking at, or if anyone's looking at the playground, if you look at the pandas example,
it'll say like include everything in pandas. And that'll give you like a lot more content
The thinking there is that most people don't really need,
like the issues you're going to be looking at
will be in your own code
or in your own company's code base.
You don't really need to look at the abstractions,
but you totally can.
But yeah, to answer the question,
like we have this like internal version of a plugin system
where, yeah, like anyone could add FastAPI support
or like a great insight into PyTorch or what have you.
The way it all works technically really is
it's totally built on top of this
Python API called set profile.
I'm not sure. Have you
come across this before? It's a bit similar
to set trace actually. Yeah.
I think so. I think I've done it
for some
C profile things before.
I'm not sure.
Yeah. It's a really neat API
to be honest because Python calls back to
your callback that you
register on every function
enter and exit
and then colo essentially looks at all of these functions enters and exits and decides which ones
are interesting so the matter of like supporting say fast api is basically just telling colo these
are the fast api functions that are interesting this is the fast api function for um for like an
http request that was served this is the http response or similarly for sql alchemy this is the
function um where the query was actually executed and sent to the database this is the variable
which has the query result,
there's a little bit more to it.
And I'm definitely generalizing,
but it's kind of like, in principle,
it's as simple as that.
It's like telling Colo,
here's the bits of code in a given library
that are interesting.
Now just kind of display that
and make that available for the test generation.
Yeah.
Excellent.
Yeah, I totally agree with you
that getting focused,
it probably gets you some more full attention
from the Django audience.
And the Django audience is quite a large
and influential group in the Python web space.
So that makes a ton of sense,
especially since you're using it.
By the way, it was Lily's Mastodon profile,
I believe, that I ran across
that I first discovered Colo from.
That would make sense.
Of all the places, yeah.
Or a post from her or something like that.
That's awesome.
Yeah, cool.
All right, so let's talk about a couple other things here.
Yeah.
So for people who haven't seen it yet,
like you get quite a bit of information.
So if you see like the get request,
you actually see the JSON response
that was returned out of that request
and it integrates kind of into your editor directly, right?
If you've seen CodeLens before,
it's kind of like CodeLens, right?
Exactly, yeah.
Yeah, this is another thing
which I think is pretty novel with Colo.
I think it's reasonably common for existing debugging tools to show you like, oh, yeah, this is the headers for the request or this is like the response status code.
But especially working with the Slack API in SimplePole, you're constantly looking at payloads and what were the values and what are you.
You don't directly in production, you don't directly get to even make those or receive those requests.
right there's some like system it's slack who was like chatting with your thing you're like well
what is happening here right not that you actually run this in there but you know i mean it's funny
you mentioned this because there is one experiment we want to run of kind of actually enabling these
extremely deep and detailed color traces in production um we haven't explored this too much
yet and i think we're going to focus a little bit more on the test generation but you could imagine
like a user who's using, you know, who's on the Talk Python site, and they've got some incredibly
niche error that no one else is, like, encountering. And you've tried to reproduce it, but you can't
reproduce it. Maybe there's a little bit of information in, like, your logging system,
but it's just not enough. And you keep adding more logging, and you keep adding more logging,
and it's just not helping. Like, imagine a world where you can say, just for that user, like,
enable colo and enable like these really deep traces.
And then you can see whenever the user next interacts,
like the value for every single variable
for every single code path that executed for that user.
That's just like, yeah.
I think one of our users described it
as like a debugger on steroids.
Yeah, it's pretty interesting.
Sounds a little bit like what you get with Sentry
and some of those things,
but maybe also a little bit different.
So, you know, you could do something like,
here's a dear user with problem.
Here's a URL.
If you click this, it'll set a cookie in your browser.
And then all subsequent behavior, it just, it's on it.
You know what I mean?
It's like recording it.
Exactly.
That'd be pretty interesting.
Fully debug your, yeah, I think it makes sense in the case,
like if a user, it could even be an automated support thing, right?
Like if, I think a couple of sites have this
where you can do a debug dump
before you submit your support ticket.
This is almost like that.
And then as an engineer who's tasked
with digging into that user's bug,
you don't have to start with piecing together
what was this variable at this time
when they made that request three days ago.
You can just see it.
How about this?
If an error ever encounters an exception on your site,
you just set the cookie.
Right.
Everything else they do is now just recorded
until you turn it off on.
Oh my gosh, you're giving me so many good ideas.
That'd be fun, right?
Let me start writing this stuff down.
Hey, let's record it.
It'll be fine.
That's awesome.
Yeah, there's a bunch of stuff that's interesting.
People can check it on the site.
It's all good.
However, we talked a little bit about the production thing.
Another thing you could do for production,
this requires both a decent amount of traffic
and maybe you could actually pull this off
on just a single server,
but you could do like,
let's just run this for 1% of the traffic
so that you don't kill the system,
but you get, you know,
if that's why I see you have enough traffic,
it's like statistically significant sampling
of what people do without actually recording,
you know, a million requests today or something.
A hundred percent.
I think there's really something there
or like, I mean, how cool would it be
if, yeah, honestly, there's,
I could go on about this whole idea of like runtime data
and like improving software understanding for days
because I just think like,
it's really this like missing layer, right?
Like all of us constantly imagine like what is,
like we play computer looking at our code,
imagining what the values can be.
But like, yeah,
say you're looking at some complex function in production
and you want to understand how it works.
Like how useful would it be if you could see like the 10,
the last 10 times it was called,
what were the values going into it
and what were the values coming out of it?
That would be, I just think,
why do we not have this already?
Why does your editor not show you
for every single function in the code base?
Give examples of how it's actually used in production.
Yeah, yeah.
And then use those to generate unit tests.
And if there's an error, use that to generate the edge case,
like the negative case, not the positive case.
Exactly.
There you go.
All right.
it's all like kind of hanging together like yeah yeah yeah once you have the data you have
interesting options yeah yeah so business model this is not this i maybe should have started
sooner with this but it's not entirely open source that may be a little little bits and pieces of it
but in general it's it's not open source that's correct yeah yeah yeah no i'm putting that out
there's a negative right this looks like a super powerful tool that people can use right right
coded and that's no for sure like yeah i think the open source question is super interesting like
i think um it's always been like something we've thought about or or considered i think there is
yeah with developer tools i think business models are always super interesting and we want to make
sure that we can have a business model for colo and like run it as like a sustainable thing as
opposed to it just being like a simple pole side project kind of indefinitely be great if colo could
like support itself and yeah have a business model i think that's how it can like really
fulfill its potential in a way um but that's not to say that like color won't ever be open source
like i think there's a lot to be said for open sourcing it i think especially like the the
capturing of the traces is maybe something like i could see us open sourcing uh i think the open
source community is fantastic i do also think it's not like a thing you get for free right like as
soon as you say hey we're open source you you open yourself up to contributions right and to like
the community actually getting involved and that's great but it also takes time and i think like
that's a path i would like to go down when we're a little bit clearer on like what colo actually is
and like where it's valuable if that makes sense yeah so if it turns out that no one cares about
how to visualize code,
then that's a great learning for us to have made.
But I'd rather get there
without a lot of work in the middle
that we could have avoided, if that makes sense.
Yeah, for sure.
It feels like once we have a better sense
of the shape of Kolo
and what the business model actually looks like,
then we can be a bit more...
yeah we can invest into open source a little bit more but to be honest like based on how everything's
looking right now like i would not be surprised at all if like big chunks like cola becomes open
core or big chunks of it are like open source um yeah yeah it makes sense to me it is fully free
at the moment so i should that's worth calling out like it's yeah there's no cost or anything um
you can also download the Python package,
and guess what?
You can look at all of the code.
It actually is all of theirs.
It is all kind of visible.
Yeah, yeah.
And that kind of leads into the next question is,
I've never used GitHub Copilot
and a few of those other things
because it's like,
here, check this box
to allow us to upload all of your code
and maybe your access keys
and everything else that's interesting
so we can, one, trainer models, and two.
you know give you some answers and that just always felt a little bit off to me
what's the story uh with the data yeah great i mean so at the moment colo is like entirely like
local product right so it's all it um it's all local like you don't have to yeah you can get
like all of the visualization everything just by using local colo in in um in vs code we do have a
way to like upload traces and um and share them like with a colleague this is actually also
something i think is like kind of playing with the idea of like writing a little like colo manifesto
like what are the things that we believe in one of them that i believe in and this goes back to
the whole like runtime layer on top of code and like there is this whole dimension this like third
dimension to code that we're all simulating in our heads i think like it should totally be possible
to not just like link to a snippet of code like on GitHub,
but it should be possible to have a link,
like a URL to a specific execution of code,
like a specific function,
and actually talk about that.
It's kind of wild to me
that we don't have this at the moment.
Like you can't send a link to a colleague saying,
hey, look at this execution.
That looks a bit weird, right?
Yeah, we ran this in continuous integration
and it crashed, but I don't understand.
Let's look at the exact.
Right. You can link to CI runs. You can link to sentry errors. But if you're just seeing something slightly weird locally, or even something slightly weird in production where there's no error yet, you can't really link to that.
Anyway, this is kind of a roundabout way of me saying that I think that totally should be a thing. You should be able to link generically to an execution of a function or an execution of a request.
And like that would totally have to live somewhere, right?
So this is where there's some idea of like Colo cloud comes in.
And this is where you could like connect your repository.
And then Colo would like, as part of that, you know, just like GitHub does have access
to your code and like show you the code in like the Colo cloud.
So I think there's definitely like useful things that are possible there.
But at the moment, it's a fully local experience.
Like your code doesn't ever leave your system.
You can if you want to like upload traces
and then Colo stores the like trace data,
not the code, just the trace data.
But yeah, very local experience right now.
Okay, yeah, a little SQLite database.
Exactly, yep.
Yeah, SQLite's pretty awesome.
Yeah, it's an incredible piece of software.
Yeah, it really, really is.
All right, let's close out our conversation here
with a little bit of a request from Michael.
Right now it's VS Code only.
Any chance for some PyCharm in there?
Yeah, so this is our top request,
like PyCharm support.
And we've decided, yeah, like super small team,
like we want to kind of support everyone.
But we've been working very heavily, actually,
the past few months on a web-based version,
which is, I'm happy to say,
like very much nearing completion.
And there's a few bits and pieces
where like it's really nice to be integrated
super deeply into the editor,
like the code lenses and all of that.
And I think there's a chance we'll have that
for PyCharm eventually as well.
But we actually found that like
they're building out this web version.
There's a few things that are actually much nicer
when you have the full control over the UI
in terms of like browsing around a trace,
highlighting little bits of code.
So for example,
we in Kolo, like a given function call,
we call a frame.
And you can look at a given frame, both in VS Code, but also in the web version and see the code and see all of the data that passed through the code.
But something we can do in the web version, we can't do in VS Code is actually show where the current function was called from and actually show like a preview of that code.
In VS Code, you can't really show like...
Yeah, you can layer multiple files together or different...
Exactly.
Yeah, exactly.
So we actually have, like, there's actually a lot of, like, I was surprised by how many different novel, like, kind of ways we had in the web that we just never even considered with, like, a direct editor integration in terms of displaying this runtime data.
So, like, long story short, like, you want a PyCharm integration, let me give you something even better, a web version.
So would that work like you run a certain command or something when you run your web app and then it just generates the SQLite file and then you could just explore it with a web view or what are you?
Yeah, it's actually kind of cooler than that.
So if you're using Django or in the future, like other things with a typical middleware, you would just like go to your, you would just go to localhost 8000.
Oh, I see.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Kind of like you do for open API docs.
Yep, exactly.
Yep.
And then the whole experience is just there.
If you're not using a middleware,
we'll have a command like coloserve or something like that.
Sure.
And that'll host the same experience for you.
Nice.
Yeah.
Just make sure it's off by default
or it only responds on local host or something like that.
You know, like,
don't let people ship it on accident.
Yeah, no production use of this.
Yeah, I mean, people already know about the Django debug settings,
but I guess you could sort of layer onto that, right?
Probably.
Yeah, I think we actually do that at the moment.
But yeah, it's worth remembering.
I know.
I'm just thinking of like,
oh, this is really cool to explore.
100%.
CNN.com is awesome.
Look what it's doing.
All these requests and all this.
Yeah, exactly.
A hundred percent.
Yeah.
Oh, and the API key is so interesting.
Anyway, that's a bit of a side conversation.
Let's just, let's wrap it up with final call action.
People are interested.
What do they do?
Yeah.
Go to colo.app and check it out.
We have a playground link there, play.colo.app.
Easiest way to kind of see what colo is and what colo does.
But we'll say the most powerful way to actually see Kolo in action is to use it on your own code base.
So seeing the visualization and the test generation capabilities is just like, yeah, the most useful when you use it on your own code base.
So hopefully the playground can entice that a little bit.
And yeah, really the main most important thing for us right now is, yeah, chatting to folks who want to increase their test coverage, want to like build automated testing as part of their workflow.
And yeah, work very closely with you to make that happen.
So if that's you, please email me at w at colo.app.
You need that pause for the W, that's right.
The two ats.
Awesome.
Will, thanks for being on the show.
Congrats on both of your projects.
They look really neat.
Thanks so much for having me.
Yeah, so excited to have been on.
Yeah, you bet.
Bye.